---
layout: post
title:  "Looking back at 2022"
date:   "2022-12-31 12:00:00 +0000"
image:  /assets/images/2022.png
hackernews: TODO
tags:
  - engineering
excerpt: |
  <p>
    This was my first full year at incident.io. So much has happened - 4x'ing
    the team, our Series A, building loads of product â€“ that it feels much
    longer.
  </p>
  <p>
    I'll break this down into reflections on team, product and writing. Only a
    few aspects of my last year, but themes I like to keep track of.
  </p>
---

I've never done this before (at least sharing it publicly) but 2023 was a wild
ride for me and I wanted to pause to consider everything that happened.

Weird to think it, but this was my first full year at incident.io, having joined
the company August 2021. So much has happened these last 12 months â€“ 4x'ing the
team, our Series A, building _loads_ of product â€“ that it feels much longer.

I'll break this down into reflections on team, product and writing. Only a few
aspects of my last year, but themes I like to keep track of.

## Team

The most obvious change has been how much incident has grown, going from ten to
forty-five people in total, and four to fifteen in Product Development.

That type of growth is really exciting, but extremely hard to do well. Honestly,
I'm astounded by the quality of the team we've put together, and think we've
managed the challenges that come with this growth fairly well.

Firstly, I'm proud of the interview process we've built. We held 800 interviews
in 2022 â€“ of which I contributed 80 â€“ and the effort we put into making the
process as fair and transparent as is possible has really paid off, with props
going to incident's awesome Talent team for a lot of that.

[martha/team]: https://incident.io/blog/joining-a-small-engineering-team
[aaron/surprise]: https://incident.io/blog/first-month-surprises

Looking at the engineering team, it's felt amazing watching people join and jump
right into things. It's particularly rewarding to see Martha speak about her
experience in "[Why I joined an engineering team of 6][martha/team]" and it be
so representative of the culture we're trying to build. Or Aaron in "[5 things
that surprised me in my first month][aaron/surprise]" be so excited about how
fast we're moving, and talk about our trust by default ethos.

It would've been easy to hire loads of people and totally screw up those key
cultural foundations. We worked hard to make sure that didn't happen, and I'm
happy with where we've landed.

Reflecting on me within the team, the most challenging part of an early stage
has been knowing how to fit in. Joining incident as the first employee, I had to
deliberately forget a lot of my previous role as a Principal because it just
wasn't relevant.

- Coordinating multi-team initiatives? Pointless, you're four people.
- Supporting team leads? We have none.
- Consulting on technical problems? Sure, but you'll be building it!

And for the first few months, forgetting everything worked pretty well. Getting
heads down building things and being totally obsessed with the product was great
fun, and helped set pace and quality of what we got out the door.

But as the team grew, I've had to gradually remember old behaviours as they
became more appropriate for the business. And that meant struggling â€“ and I have
struggled â€“ to understand how I can best contribute in this environment, from
what to focus on technically to building relationships and ways-of-working, so I
can provide support for teams without it feeling like I'm backseat driving.

I'll be starting 2023 by supporting the creation of a new team, the first we'll
be creating out of the general engineering pool. In a past life, I've found
success joining a team and helping them establish themselves, building
relationships that last so I can support them once I move away.

A year from now, I expect I'll judge myself on how well these teams have grown,
and whether I'm in a position to properly support them. So I'm looking forward
to the first of those challenges, and will be trying to learn as much as I can
from the experience.

## Product

Obviously the team comes first, but what the team has achieved is also awesome.

[cl/workflows]: https://incident.io/changelog/2021-12-06-wonderful-workflows

Starting the year, we'd just released [Workflows][cl/workflows], probably the
most complex and powerful feature we had. But while Workflows keeps that title,
it was a foundational piece of a much larger product that we hadn't yet built,
and we had a lot of obvious things missing.

We shipped too much to discuss it all here, but as some highlights:

### Building on workflows

Workflows may have shipped in 2021, but we'd designed the core workflow concepts
to be foundational for a lot of product features. In fact, the engine we'd built
for workflows had been something we'd hotly debated, it being something that
felt complex and perhaps premature at the time.

Reflecting on this with Lisa recently, we're really glad we made this bet.
Whether through luck or design, the concepts have proved remarkably solid, and
allowed us to leverage them (Lisa would call these 'lego bricks') for a number
of new product features at almost zero-cost.

[cl/expressions]: https://incident.io/changelog/2022-10-11

One of the most visible examples is extending the workflow language to support
expressions. Using expressions - if X then Y â€“ has allowed some of our customers
to consolidate ~10 workflows into one, such as a workflow to "Send updates to
team channel" with a common message using an expression to compute which Slack
channel to notify depending on the "Team" custom field.

![Screenshot of the expressions copy in the product](/assets/images/2022-expressions.png)

But like most concepts from workflows, it wasn't long before the same code that
powers workflow expressions found other uses.

Just a few places are:

[cl/jira-sync]: https://incident.io/changelog/2022-09-27
[cl/auto-create]: https://www.loom.com/share/b603e29de9b84c29ad0ba76c5d4ed0ca

- [Jira Cloud issue sync][cl/jira-sync], used to calculate the value that should
  be provided to various Jira issue fields from the details of the incident,
  such as custom fields or severity.
- [PagerDuty auto-creation][cl/auto-create], creating an expression that
  calculates the incident type or severity from the PagerDuty service or
  priority.
- Exporting follow-ups to issue trackers, to calculate default field values
  (like Linear/Jira project, or GitHub repo) depending on incident properties.

When we created these concepts I had conviction they were sound. But I expected
we'd eventually try doing something basic and realise we couldn't, because the
underlying model was flawed or incomplete.

To my surprise, we've not hit that yet. Which is really reassuring, as going
into next year we'll no doubt build even more on these foundations, and it'll be
key to our success that these concepts continue to work as a cohesive whole.

### Notifications

[cl/notifications]: https://incident.io/changelog/2022-12-14

One moment of unexpected pride was shipping [notifications][cl/notifications],
providing an interface to view notifications inside of the dashboard along with
regular email-roundups.

I say unexpected because until we built it, I hadn't realised how much
notifications made it feel like we'd built a _real_ product. Almost every
software I use offers this, so when we built an extremely slick and polished
version ourselves, I had a weird feeling that we'd 'grown up' or something.

![Screenshot of the notification email](/assets/images/2022-notifications.png)

[james]: https://twitter.com/jimmysheds

Notifications is also one of the most obvious examples of how much our design
has levelled up this year. Thanks to [James][james]' tireless efforts and
exceptional taste, we've upgraded from functional design to another level
entirely, helping the product feel premium and our team much prouder of the
great work they put into the implementation.

The feature also joins together the product so much better, adding more value to
every interaction: now when you comment on a timeline people hear about it, and
closing an incident starts feeling like you've checked something off your todo
list, rather than something you did just because.

## Writing

Something that took a backseat this year was writing, which was to be expected:
working in a start-up is pretty all-consuming (in a good way), and if I have
free time to work on something it's likely going to be incident.

There were a few pieces that are worth calling out:

- [My most impactful code](/most-impactful/) was a fun post reflecting on
  abstractions I built at GC, and did the rounds online. It's rare that people
  look back at work over a multi-year period in our industry, so mixing a bit of
  story-telling with a neat technical solution can be enjoyable.
- [Building workflows: technical deep-dive](/workflows/) was exhausting to write,
  but I'm glad I did it. Experience has taught me long-form is an awful way to
  build traction, but I wanted to capture my thoughts while they were fresh, and
  I've had several people reach out to say they've studied this for days (ðŸ¤¯)
  while building similar systems at their companies, so I'll take this a win.
- [Want to found a start-up? Work at one first!](/learn-at-scale-up/) was just
  so obviously going to cause trouble, and it did: it spent a while on the HN
  frontpage receiving all sorts of hot-take comments. I try to avoid being too
  controversial online and don't enjoy the attention when something takes off,
  so I think I'll do less of these. Was happy to share my perspective on the
  question though, especially with lots of people considering start-ups in the
  current environment.

I write mainly because it helps order my thoughts, and because I enjoy being
able to help others â€“ and myself â€“ when they hit similar problems. It's also
great practice at communicating in general, which is a superpower for almost
everything in life.

For that reason, I'd like to ensure I'm doing more of this in 2023. I'd also
hope incident will give me a lot to talk about, instead of the 50/50 mix I have
of past and present experience right now.

## 2023 ðŸ¤ž

Coming back from seeing family over the Christmas break, I've been asked several
times "how has last year gone?", especially with the idea of a start-up being
foreign to many of them.

The way my head is works, I'm always looking forward. Which is why I find it
difficult to answer that question, and one of the reasons I've written this
down, to force myself to look back and be appreciative of where I am.

And I am really appreciative. I always think I got lucky, in that for as long as
I remember I wanted to be a software engineer. And unlike many, software
engineering is exactly what I expected and more, and my work is a huge source of
joy in my life.

Working at incident is the best version of this that I've known so far. I love
the team, really believe in the product, and enjoy that this is going to be a
battle tooth-and-nail to succeed in a competitive space. It suits me great, and
while I know next years going to be really hard work, I'm already proud of what
we've achieved and excited for what comes next.
